X. Baker Farm.
Sometimes I rambled to pine groves, standing like temples or like fleets at sea, full-rigged
with wavy boughs and rippling with light, so soft and green and shady that the druids
would have forsaken their oaks to worship in them, or to the cedar-wood beyond Flint's
pond, where the trees, covered with hoary blue berries, spiring higher and higher, are
fit to stand before Valhalla, and the creeping juniper covers the ground with wreaths full
of fruit, or to swamps, where the Usnea lichen hangs in festoons from the white spruce trees
and toadstools, round tables of the swamp gods, cover the ground, and more beautiful
fungi adorn the stumps, like butterflies or shells, vegetable winkles, where the swamp
pink and dogwood grow, the red alderberry glows like eyes of imps, the waxwork grooves
and crushes the hardest woods in its folds, and the wild hollyberries make the beholder
forget his home with their beauty, and he is dazzled and tempted by nameless other wild,
forbidden fruits, too fair for mortal taste. Instead of calling on some scholar, I paid
many a visit to particular trees, of kinds which are rare in this neighborhood, standing
far away in the middle of some pasture, or in the depths of a wood or swamp, or on a
hilltop, such as the black birch, of which we have some handsome specimens two feet in
diameter, its cousin the yellow birch, with its loose golden vest, perfumed like the first,
the beech, which has so neat a bowl, and beautifully lichen-painted, perfect in all its details,
of which, excepting scattered specimens, I know but one small grove of sizable trees
left in the township, supposed by some to have been planted by the pigeons that were
once baited with beech nuts nearby. It is worth a while to see the silver grain sparkle
when you split this wood, the bass, the hornbeam, the Celtis occidentalis, or false elm, of
which we have but one well grown, some taller mast of a pine, a shingle-tree, or a more
perfect hemlock than usual, standing like a pagoda in the midst of the woods, and many
others I could mention. These were the shrines I visited, both summer and winter. Once it
that I stood in the very abutment of a rainbow's arch, which filled the lower stratum of the
atmosphere, tinging the grass and leaves around, and dazzling me as if I looked through colored
crystal. It was a lake of rainbow light, in which, for a short while, I lived like a dolphin.
If it had lasted longer it might have tinged my employments and life. As I walked on the
railroad causeway I used to wonder at the halo of light around my shadow, and would
vain fancy myself one of the elect. One who visited me declared that the shadows of some
Irishman before him had no halo about them, that it was only natives that were so distinguished.
Benvenuto Salini tells us in his memoirs that, after a certain terrible dream or vision which
he had during his confinement in the castle of St. Angelo, a resplendent light appeared
over the shadow of his head at morning and evening, whether he was in Italy or France,
and it was particularly conspicuous when the grass was moist with dew. This was probably
the same phenomenon to which I have referred, which is especially observed in the morning,
but also at other times and even by moonlight, though a constant one it is not commonly noticed,
and in the case of an excitable imagination like Salini's it would be basis enough for
superstition. Beside, he tells us that he showed it to very few. But are they not indeed
distinguished who are conscious that they are regarded at all? I set out one afternoon
to go a-fishing to Fair Haven, through the woods, to eke out my scanty fare of vegetables.
My way led through Pleasant Meadow, an adjunct of the baker-farm, that retreat of which a
poet has since sung, beginning,
Thy entry is a pleasant field, which some mossy fruit-trees yield,
Partly to a ruddy brook, by gliding musquash undertook,
And mercurial trout darting about.
I thought of living there before I went to Walden. I hooked the apples, leaped the brook,
and scared the musquash and the trout. It was one of those afternoons which seem indefinitely
long before one, in which many events may happen, a large portion of our natural life,
though it was already half spent when I started.
By the way there came up a shower, which compelled me to stand half an hour under a pine, piling
boughs over my head, and wearing my handkerchief for a shed. And when at length I had made
one cast over the pickerel weed, standing up to my middle in water, I found myself suddenly
the shadow of a cloud, and the thunder began to rumble with such emphasis that I could
do no more than listen to it. The gods must be proud, thought I, with such forked flashes
to rout a poor unarmed fisherman. So I made haste for shelter to the nearest hut, which
stood half a mile from any road, but so much the nearer to the pond, and had long been
inhabited. And here a poet builded, in the completed years, for behold a trivial cabin
that two destructions steers. So the muse fables.
But therein, as I found, dwelt now John Field, an Irishman, and his wife, and several children,
from the broad-faced boy who assisted his father at his work, and now came running by
aside from the bog to escape the rain, to the wrinkled, sibil-like, cone-headed infant
that sat upon its father's knee as in the palaces of nobles, and looked out from its
home in the midst of wet and hunger inquisitively upon the stranger, with the privilege of infancy,
not knowing but it was the last of a noble line, and the hope and sinishure of the world,
instead of John Field's poor, starvling brat. There we sat together, under that part of
the roof which leaked the least, while it showered and thundered without. I had sat
there many times of old before the ship was built that floated his family to America.
An honest, hard-working, but shiftless man plainly was John Field, and his wife, she
too was brave to cook so many successive dinners in the recesses of that lofty stove, with
face and bare breast, still thinking to improve her condition one day, with the never-absent
mop in one hand, and yet no effects of it visible anywhere. The chickens which had also
taken shelter here from the rain stalked about the room like members of the family. Too humanized,
me thought, to roast well. They stood and looked in my eye, or pecked at my shoe significantly.
Meanwhile my host told me his story, how hard he worked bogging for a neighbouring farmer,
turning up a meadow with a spade or bog hoe at the rate of ten dollars an acre, and the
use of the land with manure for one year, and his little broad-faced son worked cheerfully
at his father's side the while, not knowing how poor a bargain the latter had made.
I tried to help him with my experience telling him that he was one of my nearest neighbours,
and that I, too, who came a-fishing here, and looked like a loafer, was getting my living
like himself, that I lived in a tight, light, and clean house, which hardly cost more than
the annual rent of such a ruin as his commonly amounts to, and how, if he chose, he might
in a month or two build himself a palace of his own, that I did not use tea, nor coffee,
nor butter, nor milk, nor fresh meat, and so did not have to work to get them. Again,
as I did not work hard, I did not have to eat hard, and it cost me but a trifle for
my food. But as he began with tea, and coffee, and butter, and milk, and beef, he had to
work hard to pay for them, and when he had worked hard, he had to eat hard again to repair
the waste of his system. And so it was as broad as it was long. Indeed, it was broader
long, for he was discontented and wasted his life into the bargain, and yet he had rated
it as a gain in coming to America, that here you could get tea, and coffee, and meat every
day. But the only true America is that country where you are at liberty to pursue such a
of life as may enable you to do without these, and where the state does not endeavor to compel
you to sustain the slavery, and war, and other superfluous expenses which directly or indirectly
result from the use of such things. For I purposely talked to him as if he were a philosopher,
or desired to be one. I should be glad if all the meadows on the earth were left in
a wild state, if that were the consequence of men's beginning to redeem themselves.
A man will not need to study history to find out what is best for his own culture, but,
Alas! the culture of an Irishman is an enterprise to be undertaken with a sort of moral bog
hoe. I told him that as he worked so hard at bogging he required thick boots and stout
clothing, which yet were soon soiled and worn out, but I wore light shoes and thin clothing,
which cost not half so much, though he might think that I was dressed like a gentleman,
which however was not the case. And in an hour or two, without labor, but as a recreation,
I could, if I wished, catch as many fish as I should want for two days, or earn enough
to support me a week. If he and his family would live simply they might all go a huckle
burying in the summer for their amusement. John heaved a sigh at this, and his wife stared
with arms akimbo, and both appeared to be wondering if they had capital enough to begin
such a course with, or arithmetic enough to carry it through. It was sailing by dead reckoning
to them, and they saw not clearly how to make their port so. Therefore I suppose they still
take life bravely, after their fashion, face to face, giving it tooth and nail, not having
to split its massive columns with any fine entering wedge, and rout it in detail, thinking
to deal with it roughly, as one should handle a thistle. But they fight at an overwhelming
disadvantage. Living, John field, alas, without arithmetic, and failing so.
"'Do you ever fish?' I asked. "'Oh, yes, I catch a mess now, and then, when I'm lying
by, good perch I catch.' "'What's your bait?' "'I catch shiners with fish-worms, and bait
the perch with them.' "'You'd better go now, John,' said his wife, with glistening
and hopeful face. But John demurred. The shower was now over, and a rainbow above the eastern
woods promised a fair evening, so I took my departure. When I had got without I asked
for a drink, hoping to get a sight of the well bottom to complete my survey of the premises.
But there, alas, are shadows and quicksands, and rope broken withal, and bucket irrecoverable.
Meanwhile, the right culinary vessel was selected, water was seemingly distilled, and after consultation
and long delay passed out to the thirsty one. Not yet suffered to cool, not yet to settle.
Such gruel sustains life here, I thought. So, shutting my eyes, and excluding the moats
by a skillfully directed undercurrent, I drank to genuine hospitality the heartiest draft
I could. I am not squeamish in such cases when manners are concerned. As I was leaving
the Irishman's roof after the rain, bending my steps again to the pond, my haste to catch
Pickerel, wading in retired meadows, in sloughs and bog holes, in forlorn and savage places,
appeared for an instant trivial to me who had been sent to school and college. But as
I ran down the hill toward the reddening west, with a rainbow over my shoulder, and some
faint tinkling sounds borne to my ear through the cleansed air, from I know not what quarter,
my good genius seemed to say,
Go fish and hunt, far and wide, day by day, farther and wider, and rest thee by many brooks
and hearth-sides without misgiving. Remember thy Creator in the days of thy youth. Rise
free from care before the dawn, and seek adventures. Let the noon find thee by other lakes, and
the night overtake thee everywhere at home. There are no larger fields than these, no
worthier games than may here be played. Grow wild according to thy nature, like these sedges
and breaks, which will never become English Bay. Let the thunder rumble. What if it threaten
ruin to farmers' crops? That is not its errand to thee. Take shelter under the cloud, while
they flee to carts and sheds. Let not to get a living be thy trade, but thy sport. Enjoy
the land, but own it not. Through want of enterprise and faith, men are where they are,
buying and selling, and spending their lives like serfs.
O Baker Farm! Landscape where the richest element is a little sunshine innocent. No
one runs to revel on thy rail-fenced lee. Debate with no man hast thou. With questions
art never perplexed, as tame at the first sight as now, in thy plain russet gabardine
dressed. Come ye who love, and ye who hate, children of the holy dove, and Guy Fow of
the state, and hang conspiracies from the tough rafters of the trees. Men come tamely
home at night, only from the next field or street, where their household echoes haunt,
and their life pines because it breathes its own breath over again. Their shadows morning
and evening reach farther than their daily steps. We should come home from far, from
adventures and perils and discoveries every day, with new experience and character. Before
I had reached the pond some fresh impulse had brought out John Field, with altered mind,
letting go bogging ere this sunset. But he, poor man, disturbed only a couple of fins
while I was catching a fair string, and he said it was his luck. But when we changed
seats in the boat luck changed seats too. Poor John Field! I trust he does not read
this, unless he will improve by it, thinking to live by some derivative old country mode
in this primitive new country, to catch perch with shiners. It is good bait sometimes, I
know. With this horizon all his own, yet he, a poor man, born to be poor, with his
inherited Irish poverty or poor life, his Adam's grandmother and boggy ways, not to
in this world. He nor his posterity, till their wading webbed bog trotting feet, get
to their heels.